Hello and welcome back to the course
R programming. So let's go ahead and
solve this homework exercise.
Alright, so here I've got the file open
the section for homework data dot
R file that comes in a zip file and
this one looks like inside, so here we
scroll down you'll see we've got the
season director, the players vector then
we've got the vectors for free throws
and then no matrix which will have to
create ourselves and then there's a free
throw attempts of the vectors and we're
going to have to create the matrix. As
you can see my environment right now is
empty and we're going to proceed with
these matrices to start over. Okay so I'm
going to run this line by line so first
we're gonna run this line there we go
that's the seasons vector then the
players vector and now if we run all
these let's run them all together.
Ok so now we have all of these vectors
that we want to put in a matrix right so
there they are all of these ten vectors.
How do we put them in the matrix?
Well let's start coding this up. We're
going to create a matrix-matrix and
we'll call it free throws and we're going to use
which function, that's correct we can
choose the rbind function and now were just
going to list these vectors one by
one comma out to the a comma.
Alright there we go to put all 10
vectors into the  rbind let's just
check that there is indeed 10. So that's
one, two, three, four, five, six, seven. eight,
nine and ten perfect.
Ok so that's going to create R matrix
if we run this line now we've got the
free-throws matrix it's ready
next we're going to do is as in the
previous examples in the section. We
don't actually need these vectors
anymore we have the matrix, so just to
clear up the working space we're going
to practice removing these vectors so
we'll just take all these put them in
the RM function. So if I run this line
now I've got rid of the vectors
that's good now let's have a look at
free throws, ok so if I run that you can
see that there is our matrix as you can
see doesn't have the correct names it's
got the names of the vectors here on the
left instead of the names that we want
to see and that would be these names of
these players and also it doesn't have any
column name. So let's go ahead and fix that up.
We're going to say no I'm list of
columns so we'll say column names, free
throws right so if I run that I 'll just
get null because no column names but now
we're just going to use this vector that
we have seasons so let's put that in
there, I run that run that and now more thing
row names names for free throws is
going to be players, run that
let's have a look at the matrix free
throws.
There you go it looks beautiful right so
we've prepared this matrix it looks
fantastic.
Ok so I 'm just going to remove this line
because then for somebody who comes
along and just runs all the code we
don't want that check to pop up but the
rest of the lines of valid. Now if you
want to go ahead and do this part
yourself feel free to do so what I'm
going to do is I'm just going to copy
all of this and I'm gonna going to use a
bit of a shortcut so let's just copy
that in here and now what we want to do
is we want to replace wherever it says
ft by pressing ctrl f, we're going to
place that with FTA and I 'm just going
to find them one by one. So I don't
replace other one somewhere else in the
code there we go and I don't need to
replace those anymore.
Ok so that's fixed here just need to
change this free throw attempts and this
also over here so let's do that
alright beautiful. So let's check this
out so if I run this line,
ok I've got a problem somewhere here
Kobe Bryant FTA ohh that's right because I
haven't run this code so let's go ahead
and run these vectors first.
Ok now if I run this line there at the
matrix that's removing the vectors
that's fixing up to column names, row
names and now we can just go ahead and
check this matrix.
There we go that's our free throw
attempts beautiful so we can remove that
we can save this file we don't need this
search functionality anymore and that's
a wonderful, so that's prepared
what do we need to do now so that's just
our data preparation place what do
we need to actually find so here's the
challenge for this section we need to
find these three things. So
build these three diagrams we need free
throw attempts per game, accuracy of free
throws and player playing style two
vs. three point preference excluding free
throws alright. So let's get straight to
it. We're going to need a new file right.
So let's create a new file and here
we're going to first of all we're going
to go into our previous file where the
function is for plotting and we'll just
take it and copy it so that we have it
in here as well and then we're going to
run this function or create this object
actually there we go that function is
being created and now we can go ahead
and use it right. So let's start by
plotting the free-throws, free-throws, it's
not required from us but just to see
what it looks like there is a new data
set that was just incorporated into
analysis. So there we go lets just rerun
that so the legend looks good.
Alright so that's the free-throws just
by themselves and what we're checking
here is for any anomalies like does
something like all of maybe there's
something wrong with the vectors or
maybe we didn't create the matrix
properly but it looks ok so let's do the
same thing for attempts.
That's the free-throw attempts all right
great, so now we can proceed to the
analysis so first thing we're checking
free-throw attempts per game right.
So in order to obviously visualize this
we're actually going to need the games
matrix as you can see we don't actually
have the games matrix here because it
was in the original data set. So I 'm
going to go back to the original data
set that we used in this whole section
and we going to rerun the whole thing
run it and that will give us those extra
matrices that were in the original
challenge for the whole section. So
there's that games matrix and now we can
go ahead and use it in our
visualizations, so I'm going to say my plot
and free throw attempts divided by games so if I
run just this inside part what I'll get
is a matrix, let's make some space here so
what I'll get is a matrix that actually
has the information on how many attempts
per game each player had right so that's
that matrix separation of dividing every
element of this matrix by every element
of this matrix
and that's something we talked about
quite a lot in this course in this section
of the course and now what I'm going to
do is I'm just going to plot this whole
thing and by running this line
all together, so I run that line of code
this is the result that we're after this
is free throw attempts per game and then
let's have a look at this chart so what
can we see here, so we can see that
players average about somewhere anywhere
between 2 to 12 free throw attempts
per game and so some players are quite
up there were up there now in the most
recent season.
Everybody's kind of under eight
free-throw attempts and what else can we
see here?
Well let's have a look at Chris Paul. So
this will be an interesting one
so if you look at Chris Paul over here
you can see that his free-throw attempts
are quite low so currently sitting about
for between four and six free throw
attempts for per game and let us
remember that because it will be
interesting to kind of revert back to it
when we create the next visualization. So
let's proceed to the second one so
number two is free-throw accuracy right
and how do we get accuracy
well we need to take off obviously my
plot and here we want to take free-throw,
free-throws that's the number of
successful free throws and therefore the
number of points.
Well in this case we're just looking at
the success were interesting and
how many successful free-throws they had
and divide that by free-throw attempts.
So if I run this line what you'll see
is a new chart and this is their actual
accuracy and you can tell that it is
indeed a necklace because it is between
0 and 1 where actually 0.5 and one so
obviously can never go over one and why
did we look at Chris Paul last time?
Well look at Chris Paul here so this red
triangle you can see that his accuracy
is actually one of the highest right so
his accuracy is over there point 0.85 and
actually it in the last season it was a
higher accuracy about 0.9 higher than
all other place and I personally find it
quite surprising that he has the highest
accuracy when it comes to free throws
but he gets the lowest number of free
throw attempts
per game and that is finding that you'd
probably expect in a movie like
Moneyball right so that maybe the I'm
sure coach of this of his team and you
know the whole team themselves they have
they have a strategy but maybe this is
something that they overlooked and maybe
you could communicate to them and say
hey guys actually Chris Paul has the
highest accuracy but he's not getting as
many free throw attempts so if you look
here per game
so he's not getting as many free throw
attempts per game and maybe if you can
give them more opportunities to do free
throws
maybe then he will actually score more
points you'll have more converted
free-throw attempts.
That's a just the hypothesis and
basketball fans out there can comment on
that further but that was just an
interesting finding another thing you'll
see from this chart is that Dwight
Howard over here has a very very low
accuracy when it comes to free throws right
and that is very surprising because that
name rings a bell right don't you don't
you think so? Let's let's look at
something over here, let's look at field
goal accuracy field goals divided by field goal
attempts right.
Remember we had this plot in our data
so here we've got Dwight Howard and he's
got the highest accuracy when it comes
to field goals but in free throws he's
got the lowest accuracy and I found that
very confusing I did not understand
what's going on there at first and this
is this is something the data is
telling us but at the moment we don't
have enough information to understand
what's going on.
So let's investigate that further and
this is where on this part 3 player
style will come in handy, so let's look
at that. Part 3 player style so it's set
up player style patterns excluding free
throws right. So this is that chart that
we want to create a fix-up basically the
point so we had points in our data set
we want to subtract free throws because
every free-throw, every successful free-throw
is one point so therefore it makes sense
we don't need to multiply by any
coefficient here just minus free throws so
basically this gives us all of the
points that a player earned in that
specific season from just field goals
not from
free throws and then we divide by field goals
right? So we want to see how many
successful field goals that player had,
so if we run this we'll get that matrix and
this matrix represents the playing style
so it's hard to see from the matrix
that's plot this visualization and that
will help us see everything much better.
So there we go for all this relation we
can see right away that. We are looking
at what type of goals the players are
aiming at?
So we can confirm that our visualization is
correct our calculations correct because
now the visualization is between two and
three. It's actually between 2 & 2 3, 5 and
make sense because in basketball if
you're scoring a field goal which is not
a free throw.
You can only either get a two-pointer or
a three-point we can't get anything else
so obviously the average will be between
two and three right and so here you can
see how the playing styles have changed
over the years for instance a very
radical example is Joe Johnson. Right so
he started 10 years ago with an average
per in that season his average was to
2.20 or 2.2 points per field goal
then it went up so he started aiming for
started scoring more three pointers are
on average then it went down over the
next four years and now it's gone
drastically up so that has gone down in
the past year but a year ago it was
2.35 right. So he was scoring way
more 3-pointers then he was five years
ago and that just shows that his playing
style has changed maybe it has something
to do with his training maybe it has
something to do with his coach, maybe
it has something position on the field
most of different factors can influence
and but it's very interesting to observe
how playing style has changed for
instance Chris Bosh or he always was
mostly aiming for two pointers just a
few freedom 3-pointers at but recently
in the past 2, 3 years he started to get
more four three pointers right so and
you can also see kind of interesting
trends and a similar so for instance
this red line went up, this blue line
went up, this black line went up, the
green line up so it looks like in the
recent years most players are aiming for
more 3-pointers but then there was this gal like
drop off over here. So very interesting
kind of patterns
and if you're a fan of one of these
players you can probably tell what was
going on this is the most interesting
part where you combine insights from
your data with actual domain
knowledge and your understanding of the
the game itself so that that would be a
most interesting part I think. What are
you even if you're not a fan you can go
ahead and just research what was going
on with either of these players if
you're interested to find out more
insights. So that's number one but now let's
go back to that conundrum or that
question we had about who was it about
Dwight Howard right. So Dwight Howard is
very accurate when it comes two field
goals. He is not accurate, he is the least
accurate player when it comes to free
throws.
What is going on there? Well this chart
if you look at this chart you will find
the answer. I'll probably give you a
second to think about that for a couple
seconds and what I've found is that you
can see that Dwight Howard is actually
very very low over here consistently
scoring only two points maybe
occasionally he's got a few 3-pointers
in but generally he's only aiming for
two pointers right and that explains it
all.
That means that when it comes to field
goals and we're talking about field
goals here, he is always going to point
and two-pointer means that you can be
close to the net or in fact you might be
even intact which might be, so close that
your dunking the ball into the hoop or
you just very close that you can
basically just drop it into the net and
even not knowing anything about Dwight
Howard or his playing style I can
already tell from the data that most
likely he puts the ball in when he's
very close to the net because that way
it explains why his accuracy let's look
at it again in field goals is very high
right if you're so close to the net it's
hard not to put in but and then he
doesn't take shots he doesn't take shots
from far and they don't drop his
accuracy as opposed to other place but
when it comes to free throws
he's 's not that good right because you
can't because the next you have to be 15
feet away from the net just throw in a
free throw and apparently his throwing
accuracy is not that good and that
explains all that end when I found these
insights, it was very interesting and
actually satisfying to finally find the
answer and see how all of this comes
the other that you need to look at these
three tables or three visualizations to
understand what exactly is going on.
So there we go that's our three insights
as requested by the challenge. I'm sure
you had lots of fun creating these
visualizations and investigating the
basketball trends and moreover now you
have two additional tables and you've
got all this data. So feel free to play
around and see what other instance you
can find as you can see it's very
interesting which you can tell from the
data even not knowing anything about the
game and I look forward to seeing you
next time
until then, happy coding.